# S3 - Simple Storage Service

S3 is a object repository. It never copies object partially (either nothing or fully).

- 11 **9**'s garuntee. So backup of S3 is never reqruied.

## Life-cycle of S3

- (FIRST) create bucket
- 2 put files
- 3 any operation on the objects
- 4 Delete the object
- (LAST) delete bucket

> Note: Deleting a non-empty bucket impossible.

## Bucket

- Bucket are place where object are saved.
- multiple object can be grouped and can be kept inside a Object.
- naming convention of s3 bucket is difficult as it need to be unique among all the customer and across other regions.
  - Uppercase, underscore, '/' are not allowed.
  - 3 to 63 in length.
  - numbers, '.', ':' are allowed.
  - dns compliant naming conventions [bucket naming convention](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/BucketRestrictions.html#bucketnamingrules).

## S3 ACL (access control list)

- they are used for giving access to S3 bucket and objects.
- every bucket and obj have a ACL attached to it. By default owner get the full access of the S3 objects.
- it contains accounts and groups who ca access an S3 resources.
- when a access request is received, S3 allows only authorized user to access the resources.

### Structure of S3 ACL

[structure is defined here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/acl-overview.html#CannedACL)

- There are two primary elements in the ACL: `OWNER` and `GRANT`.

### Grantee

Is the person you can give access to. It can be AWS user or S3 predefined group. It identifies user or pre-defined group using canonical id or email (not recommended for use).

### Anonymous user

Anonymous users can store object in public bucket. (Very imp: so that you don't end up paying for others data).
65a011a29cdf8ec533ec3d1ccaae921c is the anonymous user canonical id.

### Pre-defined S3 group

Authenticated users are defined in `http://acs.amazonaws.com/groups/global/AuthenticatedUsers`

### Available ACL permissions

READ, WRITE, READ_ACP (read ACL), WRITE_ACP (write ACL), FULL_CONTROL (all).
These permission can either be granted to bucket or store.

### Available Access policy permissions

This mapping is automatically given based on ACL permission.

- READ:
  - s3:ListBucket
  - s3:ListBucketVersions
  - s3:ListBucketMultipartUploads
  - s3:GetObject
  - s3:GetObjectVersion
  - s3:GetObjectTorrent
-WRITE:
  - s3:PutObject
  - s3:DeleteObject
- READ_ACP
  - s3:GetBucketAcl
  - s3:GetObjectAcl
  - s3:GetObjectVersionAcl
- WRITE_ACP:
  - s3:PutBucketAcl
  - s3:PutObjectAcl
  - s3:PutObjectVersionAcl
- FULL_CONTROL
  - all above

### Canned ACL

These are pre defined ACL by AWS. In this case no need to define a ACL. They are applicable to bucket or object, only bucket or only object.

Available canned ACL are

- private
- public-read
- public-read-write
- aws-exec-read
- authenticated-read
- bucket-owner-read
- bucket-owner-full-control
- log-delivery-write

## Storage class

AWS S3 comes up with different storage class. Select storage class based on the performance required.

[AWS S3 Storage class available](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/storage-class-intro.html)

default to STANDARD, followed by S3 STANDARD-INFREQUENT, S3 ONEZONE-INFREQUENT, S3 GLACIER, S3 GLACIER DEEP ARCHIVE.

## S3 Glacier and Glacier archive

- Data archival and long-term backup
- $1/TB/Month
- Query-in-place functionality (analytics can be performed easily)
- Three retrieval options
  - Standard - low cost
  - Bulk retrieval - cost effective for large amounts
  - Expedite - urgent retrieval
